Trenna Sutcliffe is a developmental behavioral pediatrician and the founder and medical director of the Sutcliffe Clinic in the San Francisco Bay Area, where she partners with families to provide care for children facing behavioral challenges, developmental differences, and school struggles. In this episode, Trenna shares her journey into developmental and behavioral pediatrics, including her pioneering work at Stanford and her expertise in autism, ADHD, and anxiety—the “three As.” She explores the diagnostic processes, the overlap and comorbidities of these conditions, and the importance of personalized treatment plans that address both medical and environmental factors. Trenna offers valuable insights into the changing prevalence of autism, the impact of evolving diagnostic criteria, and the range of therapies and medications available to support children and their families. She also discusses the challenges in accessing care and the critical need for a holistic approach that bridges healthcare and education.
Subscribe on:
APPLE PODCASTS
|
RSS
|
GOOGLE
|
OVERCAST
|
STITCHER
Play
#330 – Autism, ADHD, and Anxiety: Understanding the rise in autism and a multidisciplinary approach to diagnosis and treatment of each condition in children | Trenna Sutcliffe, M.D.
#330 – Autism, ADHD, and Anxiety: Understanding the rise in autism and a multidisciplinary approach to diagnosis and treatment of each condition in children | Trenna Sutcliffe, M.D.
1x
15s
30s
0:00
1:57:14
We discuss:
Trenna’s passion for developmental-behavioral pediatrics (DBP), and the process of diagnosing anxiety, ADHD, and autism [3:15];
Understanding anxiety and ADHD: assessing impairment and self-esteem and identifying anxiety and emotional well-being in young patients [9:45];
The evolving diagnosis of autism: understanding the spectrum and individual needs [16:30];
The dramatic rise in autism spectrum disorder (ASD): genetics, environment, expanded diagnostic criteria, and more [25:45];
Exploring epigenetics and the potential multigenerational impact of environment exposures on susceptibility to certain disorders [37:15];
The evolution of autism classifications, and the particular challenges for children with level 1 (mild) autism due to a lack of support [41:15];
The broadening of the autism spectrum: benefits and risks of expanded diagnostic criteria and the need for future frameworks to focus on better outcomes [48:00];
The overlap between ASD, ADHD, and anxiety [57:15];
Understanding oppositional defiant disorder, and the importance of understanding the “why” behind a behavior when creating treatment plans [1:00:45];
Defining developmental-behavioral pediatrics (DBP), and Trenna’s professional journey [1:07:00];
Updated methods of ABA (applied behavioral analysis) therapy: evolution, controversies, challenges of scaling autism care, and the need for tailored interventions [1:13:45];
Advice for parents trying to find and evaluate care for children with autism, ADHD, or anxiety [1:22:45];
Tailored treatments for ADHD: balancing stimulant medications with behavioral training [1:28:30];
The interplay between medication, behavioral therapy, and neuroplasticity in managing ADHD, and the potential to grow out of the need for medication [1:39:45];
Using medication to treat anxiety and other symptoms in kids with autism without ADHD [1:44:45];
FAQs about medicating children with ADHD: benefits, side effects, dosage, and more [1:46:30];
The “superpowers” associated with level 1 autism [1:48:45];
The next steps to increase support for children with ASD, anxiety, and ADHD [1:50:45]; and
More.
Show Notes
Trenna’s passion for developmental-behavioral pediatrics (DBP), and the process of diagnosing anxiety, ADHD, and autism [3:15]
Trenna did her undergrad and master’s degree in genetics, then went on to medical school
After medical school, she did a residency in pediatrics but ultimately wanted to do developmental-behavioral pediatrics
It was a good fit with her interested and passions
She did a year in pediatric neurology and then a fellowship in developmental-behavioral pediatrics before moving to California
Her interests today primarily revolve around behavioral therapy for 3 things that we’re going talk about: autism, ADHD, and anxiety
We’re coming at this through the lens of what Trenna does today
Which is running a really large, successful multidisciplinary
clinic
for children up to 18 years old
How are the diagnostic criteria defined, and how does a practicing clinician use the
DSM-5
or maybe modify that in the way that they try to come up with a diagnosis?
⇒
Anxiety, ADHD, and autism are all behavioral clinical diagnoses based on checklists of a number of traits and characteristics
You need to be working with a physician trained in these conditions who has enough experience diagnosing these conditions
Essentially, that person needs to be an expert on what the clinical picture looks like because there’s
no biomarkers
for any of these conditions
That’s the key thing: there are no blood tests, no brain scans to say who has anxiety, who has ADHD, who has autism
Trenna explains to families all the time, “
I have these clinical boxes and labels and diagnoses in my clinic, and these boxes and are manmade. We create these lists of criteria, but neurobiology in the brain is much more complex than these boxes.
”
The key thing is to have a clinician who collects lots of data on the child
Their traits at home, at school, in multiple environments
Talking to parents, getting the history
Getting information from people other than parents: using rating forms or talking to teachers and therapists
Ideally, we get to see the child in their real-life environments
Maybe even observing them in a real-life place like school
And then doing assessment in the clinic to collect information about them
With that, the clinician decides whether or not they meet diagnostic criteria
A list of traits or characteristics described in a book called the DSM
⇒
One of the key things is about
whether or not those traits are creating impairment
, and that’s a key criteria for any of these diagnoses
For example, anxiety
We all have feelings of anxiety
Anxiety is actually a very appropriate normal feeling that we should all have, but it’s all about how much impairment is it creating, how does it impact function, and impact someone doing their job
For a child, their job is to learn and go to school, make friends, practice communicating and interacting with other peers, and be a positive contributor in their community (which is school)
So it’s about how these traits impact their function in that job
What would you say is the youngest age that each of those could be diagnosed?
For
autism
, we can confidently make that diagnosis as young as 18 months of age
Although the typical age for diagnosis is 3 or 4 [years old]
In the last 20 years, there’s been 1 or 2 cases where Trenna has made it at 15 months of age because it was very significant and obvious
Most often, at that young age, we do wait a few more months to watch how the child develops because kids are moving target
With autism, it can be 18 months, 2 years of age
Although half of the cases of autism are diagnosed over 6
With
ADHD
, you can make a diagnosis as young as 4 years of age
But from Trenna’s clinical experience, she rarely jumps into the diagnosis with 4- or 5-year-olds because they’re still a moving target
She may start behavioral interventions and parenting support but generally waits closer to school age
Peter asks, “
When you say school, you don’t mean preschool. You mean actual kindergarten, 5 to 6?
”
Yes, a lot of people will wait till 5 or 6 to really see how that child is evolving, although technically you could make it younger
With
anxiety
, there’s many different types of anxiety
There’s
separation anxiety
There’s something called
selective mutism
in young kids in preschoolers
There’s definitely anxiety conditions in preschoolers
Understanding anxiety and ADHD: assessing impairment and self-esteem and identifying anxiety and emotional well-being in young patients [9:45]
You said separation anxiety is an example, and anyone who’s been a parent can appreciate moments of that
What are some of the other types of anxiety, and how do you look to spot those in kids?
“
Anxiety is actually a normal emotion that we should all have. So it’s all about whether it’s creating enough impairment
.”‒ Trenna Sutcliffe
Someone may have
generalized anxiety
: it’s seen in multiple places as pretty pervasive
People can have
specific phobias
towards dogs or spiders or other things
There’s
separation anxiety
Many toddlers have separation anxiety and that’s very normal
It’s about how severe and significant the anxiety is, how pervasive it is, and whether it is impacting function
When it’s impacting the ability for a child to go to childcare or preschool, then it’s something we need to help
There’s something called
selective mutism
Children who are able to speak very well and speak well at home or with familiar adults but do not speak and are mute outside of that familiar environment
There’s also
obsessive-compulsive disorder
, where people have obsessive thoughts or compulsive behaviors
Peter notices, “
You’ve reiterated it twice now, which tells me how important it is. It really has to come down to this impairment thing.
”
He points out that all of us could probably read through the DSM-5 and place ourselves in each of these diagnostic buckets
The truth of it is to ask, “
Which is maladaptive, which is mostly giving me the negative response that is impacting relationships or work or these other things?
”
Peter likes that framework for kids because you may think that your kid has ADHD but they’re doing well in school, enjoy playing sports, and have friends
How would you help a parent navigate that if they think their son, daughter has ADHD
What are the impairment-style questions you would be asking to paint the contours of this condition, even if you acknowledge that that kid’s got a lot of energy?
Those are great questions because it is definitely a spectrum (there’s a
bell curve
)
We’re all on a bell curve
When does it become leaving the average range (the typical profile) and over into what we call a disorder?
Trenna adds the caveat, “
I don’t like to use the word disorder for these conditions either because I think they’re just learning differences and thinking differences as well.
”
Questions around impairment, the #1 thing she talks about with families is self-esteem
How is it impacting that child’s self-concept, how they see themselves?
How is it impacting their relationships with peers? That’s another key one
Does it impact social interactions?
Does it impact how they connect with peers?
Does it impact the feedback they’re getting from peers?
How does it impact their ability to learn and access learning opportunities at school or on the playground?
Are these traits impacting their ability to fully engage in learning, be successful, show their potential?
Trenna emphasizes, “
The self-esteem thing is very important to me.
”
These are all biologic conditions: there’s neurochemicals, there’s genetics involved
And for a child to have a biologic condition and be in class and then feel bad because they are worried they’re not doing well enough, and they’re getting a lot of negative feedback from teachers and peers, not because those people are trying to be mean or negative, but they have to constantly remind that child because that child is forgetting things, losing things, forgot to put their name on the piece of paper, completely off task
It’s not sustaining attention in a conversation
It’s actually avoiding tasks that require a lot of sustained attention
There’s a lot of these traits where it’s impacting the child’s ability to be successful day to day at school
How do you assess self-esteem?
{end of show notes preview}
Would you like access to extensive show notes and references for this podcast (and more)?
Check out this post
to see an example of what the substantial show notes look like. Become a member today to get access.
Become a Member
Trenna Sutcliffe, M.D., M.S., F.R.C.P.C, F.A.A.P.
Trenna Sutcliffe earned a bachelor’s in molecular biology and medical genetics from the University of Toronto. She continued there earning a master’s in medical biophysics before completing her medical degree at McMaster University in Hamilton, Canada. Trenna did a residency in pediatrics followed by pediatric neurology. She then did a fellowship in developmental pediatrics at The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto. Next, she moved to Sanford University where she completed a master’s in health research and policy. She worked at Stanford for a number of years as a developmental-behavioral pediatrician (DBP) and instructor in the Department of Pediatrics. After which, she worked at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation in Los Altos, California as a DBP. In 2014, she founded the Sutcliffe Clinic in Los Altos, California and has worked there as the medical director ever since.
Dr. Sutcliffe’s clinic provides personalized medical care for children and families with developmental and behavioral concerns. They implement evidence-based interventions and comprehensive support to help children thrive. They focus on a child’s strengths, teaching essential skills, involving parents, and empowering families to promote the well-being and development of the child. Dr. Sutcliffe specializes in treating children with autism spectrum disorder, ADHD, anxiety, and developmental delays. [
Sutcliffe Clinic
]
Blog:
Sutcliffe Clinic Blog