In this “Ask Me Anything” (AMA) episode, the discussion zeroed in on the practical application of hormone replacement therapy in women. Peter walks through the signs, symptoms, and hormonal changes in women approaching – and going through – menopause. He provides an overview of the FDA-approved HRT formulations and explains how women might go about choosing the right option for themselves. Peter also describes the significant changes in testosterone levels in women over time and the options, as well as the considerations and challenges of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) for women. Lastly, Peter highlights the necessary role of compounding pharmacies in HRT, underscores concerns regarding the quality and sterility of compounded drugs, and offers guidance on locating a trustworthy pharmacy.
If you’re not a subscriber and listening on a podcast player, you’ll only be able to hear a preview of the AMA. If you’re a subscriber, you can now listen to this full episode on your
private RSS feed
or on our website at the
AMA #52 show notes page
. If you are not a subscriber, you can learn more about the subscriber benefits
here
.
Play
#275 - AMA #52: Hormone replacement therapy: practical applications and the role of compounding pharmacies
#275 - AMA #52: Hormone replacement therapy: practical applications and the role of compounding pharmacies
1x
15s
30s
0:00
18:01
We discuss:
Why hormone replacement therapy is such an important topic [2:00];
The onset of menopause: symptoms, blood tests, and when to consider HRT [6:00];
Tests that may provide indications of perimenopause and their implications for fertility [9:15];
Vasomotor symptoms: hormonal changes that cause hot flashes/night sweats, and HRT therapies that can help [13:45];
The role of estrogen in menopausal HRT [17:30];
The limited role of progesterone in HRT protocols [25:15];
What is a “bioidentical” hormone? [28:30];
Overview of the FDA-approved HRT formulations [31:45];
Determining HRT dosing and considerations for perimenopausal women [37:45];
Choosing the right HRT formulation: pros and cons [43:30];
Examining the link between certain forms of estrogen and breast cancer [46:45];
Changes in testosterone levels in women over time and why it matters [50:00];
Recognizing low testosterone in women: common symptoms and diagnosis [53:45];
Testosterone replacement therapy for women: options, considerations, and challenges [57:30];
The long-term use of testosterone in women: examining the limited data [1:00:15];
What is a compounding pharmacy? [1:09:30];
Reasons to opt for a compounding pharmacy over a pharmacy that adheres to stricter regulations [1:16:00];
The tragic incidents that heightened concerns about compounding pharmacies [1:20:45];
Tips for finding a reputable compounding pharmacy [1:27:45]; and
More.
§
Get Peter’s expertise in your inbox 100% free.
Sign up to receive
An Introductory Guide to Longevity by Peter Attia
, weekly longevity-focused articles, and new podcast announcements.
"
*
" indicates required fields
This field is hidden when viewing the form
H-o-n-e-y-p-o-t
CAPTCHA
Email
*
Name
This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.
Δ
Why hormone replacement therapy is such an important topic [2:00]
Today, we’re going to do is answer questions that have come through from subscribers around, hormone replacement therapy and testosterone replacement therapy as it relates to women
This is a topic that’s been talked about on the
JoAnn Manson episode
,
Sharon Parrish episode
, as well as the
Endocrine System podcast
These questions really focus around the
practical
application of HRT and TRT for women and how you use these in your practice with your female patients
Wrapped up in this conversation around HRT is the topic of
compounding pharmacies
Those who need to get HRT and custom HRT prescriptions, we’ll use compound pharmacies
When you talk about something like sex hormones, there’s a potential thinking that you’re only speaking to half the population, but of course, while everything we’re going to talk about is directly applicable to women, it’s obviously applicable to men who know or care about women
Why is HRT for women an important topic
Why did you feel it was important to touch on hormone replacement therapy again as it relates to women and pull more questions around this?
This is a very frustrating topic, says Peter
The mainstream medical community has committed a gross injustice over the past 20 years in the misinterpretation of the
Women’s Health Initiative
and the subsequent demonization of hormones in perimenopausal and postmenopausal therapy for women
⇒ Check out
episode #153 with Joann Mason
“The sum total of lives that have been saved due to less breast cancer as a result from the lack of HRT for the past 20 years is exactly zero.” —Peter Attia
There were zero additional deaths due to HRT from breast cancer
There were more cases of breast cancer—1 in 1,000—but it translated to nothing in deaths
In addition, Peter says “
I’m positive we could point to additional deaths due to hip fractures
.”
See
AMA #37
And all that says nothing about the quality of life that has been compromised
The purpose of this podcast today is to talk about the logistics of how one goes about hormone replacement therapy and what all of the options are
The onset of menopause: symptoms, blood tests, and when to consider HRT [6:00]
There’s a broad spectrum of the severity of symptoms that women will experience in menopausal transition
How will women know if it’s time for them to start considering HRT?
And what the tests are that can be done to confirm the onset of menopause?
Menopause is a clinical diagnosis and technically, it’s really diagnosed retrospectively—it requires 12 months of amenorrhea, so 12 months of not having a period, without any other obvious pathologic or physiologic cause
That said, there are a number of things that we can measure in the blood that tell us we’re heading there or if you just happen to have difficulty or for other reasons have an inconsistent period (such as the use of an IUD, which can interfere with a period) these blood tests can be particularly helpful.
The mainstay of looking at this is measuring
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
and to a lesser extent, luteinizing hormone (LH)
FSH is perhaps the single most important hormone to look at to get a sense of where a woman is on her trajectory towards menopause
This was covered in great detail in the
video
that Peter made on the female sex hormone system where you’ll get a sense of what FSH and LH are doing and how they’re changing throughout a cycle:
The “gold standard”—especially in the case of a woman who is still having a period—if you can measure FSH and LH and estradiol just to round it out on day five, day one being the day the period begins so five days in, that’s a very good test
Once that number starts to get to 20 or 25, that’s really the surefire sign that a woman is in menopause
It’s important to understand that if a woman is sitting here and she’s not in menopause yet and wondering, well, “is that it? Is that the diagnosis?”
No. Again, the diagnosis is based on amenorrhea
But for many women, they’re going to be having symptoms even before they get there
Common symptoms
{end of show notes preview}
Would you like access to extensive show notes and references for this podcast (and more)?
Check out this post
to see an example of what the substantial show notes look like. Become a member today to get access.
Become a Member