This video clip is from
episode #176 – AMA #27: The importance of muscle mass, strength, and cardiorespiratory fitness for longevity
, originally released on September 20, 2021.
If you’re a subscriber, you can listen to this full episode on your
private RSS feed
or on our website at the
AMA #27 show notes page
. If you are not a subscriber, you can learn more about the subscriber benefits
here
.
Show Notes
Changing mortality risk based on VO2 max and cardiorespiratory fitness [7:45]
Figure 1.
Patient survival by performance group. (
Mandsager et al., 2018
)
Overview of the experiment:
A group of people that were 53 years old on average
Ran them through a VO2 max test and then it ranked them
Low were people who scored in the bottom 25th percentile
Below average was the 25th to 50 percentile
50 to 75th percentile was above average
High was 75th to maybe 95th
Elite was just that top 5%.
NOTE: Each of these levels do NOT represents 20% of the population
A total of 122,000 patients
The low, below average, above average, and high have about 30,000 participants in each one of those groups
And then the elite group has a little over 3,500
Results:
Looking at all-cause mortality there’s a pretty clear trend
The two things that stand out are,
i) there’s kind of a monotonic relationship between fitness and mortality
ii) By far the biggest gap is between the people in the bottom 25%. Which are categorized as low fitness, and basically everyone above them.
Figure 2.
Risk-adjusted all-cause mortality. (
Mandsager et al., 2018
).
When sort of lumping everyone in together, male and female, if you have low fitness and then comparing it to everybody else,
what’s the risk reduction?
If you go from low to below average, to above average, to high to elite, you can see what is the hazard ratio
Important stats
Going from just being low to being below average is a 50% reduction in mortality over a decade
If you then go from low to above average, it’s about a 60% or 70% reduction in mortality
Then it just continues monotonically to increase
The lowest improvement is going from high to elite—”
That doesn’t buy you a whole heck of a lot. It is still statistically significant.
”
To see that you have to look at Table C
remember, the hazard ratio for mortality is the reciprocal of the hazard ratio of risk reduction
Tables A and C are basically showing you similar things in the group comparison
Here’s what’s interesting…
If you compare someone of low fitness to elite, it is a five fold difference in mortality over a decade
They put this in the context of other things that we commonly understand as being problematic for mortality… Namely, smoking, coronary artery disease, Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and end-stage renal disease
That’s a 41% increase in mortality over the decade
Coronary artery disease, 29%.
Diabetes, 40%.
High blood pressure, 21%.
End-stage renal disease, about 180% increase in mortality
But now when you compare that to the differences in these fitness levels, it gives you a greater appreciation for
how much improvement in mortality comes from improving your fitness
If you look at the biggest driver of mortality, which would be end-stage renal disease in this cohort, it’s the same as going from low cardiorespiratory fitness to above average cardiorespiratory fitness
So going from the bottom 25th percentile to being in the 50th to 75th percentile… “
which is a totally achievable feat
”
§