This clip is from
“Ask Me Anything” (AMA) episode #05
, originally released on April 22, 2019, talks about how to train for the Centenarian Decathlon™.
If you’re a member, you can now listen to this full episode on your
private RSS feed
or
on our website
. If you are not a member,
learn more about the how to become a member and the benefits here
.
Show Notes
How to train for the Centenarian Decathlon™ [18:00]
The body, in most people, will fail before the other systems (brain, heart, etc.)
⇒ This fact got Peter thinking,
how do we mitigate that?
Came up with this idea of
backcasting
(instead of forecasting) what I want to do in the end (the term backcasting being borrowed from
Annie Duke
who wrote
Thinking in Bets
)
First question… “
If I want to live to 100, what do I have to physically be able to do to be satisfied with my life?
”
Personally for Peter that means…
Being able to play with his potential future grandkids and even great grandkids
Shoot a
bow and arrow
Lifting a 30 lb suitcase into an overhead bin
Among other basic
ADL
⇒ In total Peter listed
18 things he’d like to be able to do at 100,
below are some of them…
Some of them seem trivial (i.e. get up off the floor with a single point of support (i.e. using just one arm)
Able to drop into a squat position and pick up a child that weighs 30 pounds
I want to be able to lift something that weighs 30 pounds over my head (i.e. a suitcase into an overhead bin)
Get out of a pool without a ladder
Next question…
What are physical tasks that would approximate those things?
⇒ Example: Picking up the 30-pound kid who comes running at you could be approximated by a 30 lb
goblet squat
Figure 2. The goblet squat
. Image credit:
xbodyconcepts.com
⇒ Once you have the approximate exercise, begin working backwards from there while keeping in mind the inevitable fact that there will be a natural decline:
I want to be able to do these things at 100 ⇒ so I need able to do these things at 80 ⇒ this level at 60 ⇒ And I need to be able to do it at this level today
The framework =
Since everyone is different, with different limitation, it is hard to say what one should be doing today to reach their 100-year olympics, but rather,
it makes more sense to focus on the framework
⇒
Four components of exercise
:
Stability
Strength
Aerobic performance
Anaerobic output
Each exercise focuses on at least 1 of the 4
Every one of the 18 things on Peter’s list touch at least one of those (many touch more than one)
With the goblet squat, for example, it requires both strength and stability
Also on Peter’s list is
being able to walk up three flights of stairs with 10 lb of groceries in each hand
(aerobic, and on the threshold of aerobic/anaerobic, also got strength)
Stability
Where most
people start to fail first is stability
We were born with an innate ability to squat (Start to lose it in school years from all the sitting)
Figure 3. “Wanna learn how to squat? Just ask a toddler. They won’t be able to ‘articulate’ their form, per se, but the visual is worth a thousand words. Here is my guy giving me a seminar today.”
Image credit:
@peterattiamd
The field of dynamic neuromuscular stabilization is built on the principle that there are ~14 movements that are completely innate to us and by the time we’re a 1.5 years or so we are able to do them all perfectly ⇒ basically all downhill from there and accelerated significantly by school
Once you start sitting, that’s when we lose so much of that stability. We lose the ability to maintain tension through our pelvic floor and throughout the entire movement
We lose our ability maintain tension throughout our entire “core” (referring to the diaphragm, the obliques, the transversalis fascia and the entire
pelvic floor
)
Peter’s two cents:
Spend as much time as possible working on dynamic stability and static stability
Static first, then dynamic
Incorporate stability into your strength workouts (because at the age of 25 you can do a lot of dumb things and get away with it incorrectly but will start to impact you down the road)
§
Selected Links / Related Material
Book recommendation from Peter that coined the term “backcasting”
:
Thinking in Bets: Making Smarter Decisions When You Don’t Have All the Facts
by Annie Duke | (amazon.com) [20:00]
Book by Doug McGuff that is a proponent of super slow training
:
Body by Science: A Research Based Program for Strength Training, Body building, and Complete Fitness in 12 Minutes a Week
by Doug McGuff and John Little | (amazon.com) [30:15]
Centenarian studies
: [32:00]
Nir Barzilai’s study
:
The Longevity Genes Project
| (einstein.yu.edu)
Tom Perls’s study
:
New England Centenarian Study
| (wikipedia.org)
§