One of the great sources of joy that I derive from my work is that I’m constantly learning. In an effort to provide my readers and listeners with valuable insights for improving your health and wellness, I find I’m often absorbing new information and making behavioral changes right alongside you.
Such was the case with my recent “
Ask Me Anything
” foray into the topic of microplastics, in which I described strategies for reducing exposure and their relative costs and effort requirements. I certainly learned quite a bit while preparing for this episode, but in addition, many of you generously shared with me your suggestions for non-plastic products to use in place of plastic alternatives following the episode’s release. I’ve made a number of changes in my own home as a result, which I’ve highlighted in the video below.
I’ve included links below to the products shown in the video solely as a means of sharing suggestions that I’ve found useful myself. (
Please note:
I am not affiliated with the product manufacturers in any way and do not receive any money from product sales or for mentioning them here. I’m just passing along the product recommendations that I’ve received from podcast listeners since the AMA that I have found helpful myself. For anyone who is interested in my disclosures, you can always find up-to-date information on them here:
peterattiamd.com/disclosures
.)
These are likely not the only options available for someone looking to replace plastic items in their homes, nor are the mitigation strategies I discussed in the video the only possible ways to reduce exposure (more are discussed in the AMA). They represent my personal choices and where I decided to draw my own line with cost and effort to limit exposure, but not everyone needs to follow the same formula.
We don’t yet have a clear understanding of the health implications of microplastic exposure, and even with the greatest possible investment of money and effort, we can’t eliminate exposure completely. So each individual must decide for themselves and their families where to strike a balance. I simply hope that by sharing the knowledge I’ve used to inform my personal choices, I might better empower you all to make your own.
Products mentioned
Again, please note that I have zero affiliation with any of these companies or any third-party vendors linked below (see note above).
Coffee machine:
Ratio Eight Coffee Machine
French press coffee maker:
Frieling French Press
Stainless steel water bottle:
GCN X Camelbak Podium VSS Bottle
and
Bivo Trio 21 oz Bottle
Glass bottles:
Stock Your Home Liter Glass Milk Bottle
Additionally, as mentioned above, these are by no means the only options for non-plastic versions of these products. My hope is that they serve as a useful starting point, but readers are encouraged to shop around for products that suit their needs and preferences – and if you find something you love, don’t hesitate to share!
For a list of all previous weekly emails, click
here
.
podcast
|
website
|
ama