Michael Rintala is a sports medicine chiropractor and one of only 18 international instructors teaching dynamic neuromuscular stabilization (DNS) for the Prague School of Rehabilitation. This episode focuses on understanding DNS, including the foundational principles and how it relates to human motor development. Michael also shares the most common injuries and issues he sees in patients in his practice, such as postural problems and back pain, and how the movements of a DNS program are used to avoid injury, maintain longevity, and improve sports performance.
Note:
In addition to the extensive show notes, for this episode
Drive
members
also get a collection of
8 instructive exercise videos
. If you’re a subscriber, you can now view these videos at the bottom of this page (make sure you are logged in). If you are not a member, you can
learn more about the member benefits here
.
Subscribe on:
APPLE PODCASTS
|
RSS
|
GOOGLE
|
OVERCAST
|
STITCHER
We discuss:
Michael’s background in chiropractic sports medicine and rehabilitation (3:15);
The Prague School of Rehabilitation, and functional rehabilitation as the foundation of the dynamic neuromuscular stabilization (DNS) program (5:00);
Foundational principles of DNS, and the role of the diaphragm in muscular stability (19:00);
Types of muscle contractions (28:15);
Human motor development through the lens of DNS, and when issues begin to arise (32:30);
Common postural syndromes (50:00);
Increasing functional threshold to minimize time in the functional gap (56:45);
DNS for injuries, pain, pre-habilitation, and performance enhancement (1:03:45);
Etiology of back pain (1:10:00);
How a stress fracture in his back led Michael to the Prague School (1:16:00);
The Prague School curriculum: 3 tracks for certification in DNS (1:20:45); and
More.
§
Get Peter’s expertise in your inbox 100% free.
Sign up to receive
An Introductory Guide to Longevity by Peter Attia
, weekly longevity-focused articles, and new podcast announcements.
"
*
" indicates required fields
This field is hidden when viewing the form
H-o-n-e-y-p-o-t
CAPTCHA
Email
*
Email
This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.
Δ
Michael’s background in chiropractic sports medicine and rehabilitation [3:15]
Grew up in Northern CA
Went to UC San Diego
Played multiple sports but was particularly interested in tennis
Played lots of junior tennis tournaments
Also played in college
Today he is a chiropractor based in San Diego
Specializes in rehabilitation sports medicine
Part of sports medicine team for PGA Tour and the World Surf League Tour
On USA Surfing Performance Committee
The Prague School of Rehabilitation, and functional rehabilitation as the foundation of the dynamic neuromuscular stabilization (DNS) program [5:00]
Peter practices dynamic neuromuscular stabilization (DNS) and works with Michael,
Beth Lewis
, and
Michael Stromsness
Prague School of Rehabilitation
founded in 1950s at Charles University in Prague in the Czech Republic (formerly Czechoslovakia)
DNS is based on
functional rehabilitation
Pavel Kolář
currently runs the rehabilitation department at Prague School
Behind the Iron Curtain during Cold War, doctors tended towards observation and palpation for diagnosis and treatment
DNS was pioneered by three Prague School neurologists,
Vladimir Janda
,
Karel Lewit
, and
Václav Vojta
Postural habituation
Prague’s Vladimir Janda described postural habituation, when a specific musculature tends towards tightness while other musculature tends towards weakness
Upper cross syndrome
: neck and shoulder region
Figure 1. Upper cross syndrome.
Image credit:
Rise Beyond Fitness
When spend a lot of time sitting, the neck muscles would tend towards a tightening / over-activation / hypertonicity
occipital muscles, the sternocleidomastoid (also attaches to the skull and down to the sternoclavicular joint), the pectoralis, the upper trapezius
{end of show notes preview}
Would you like access to extensive show notes and references for this podcast (and more)?
Check out this post
to see an example of what the substantial show notes look like. Become a member today to get access.
Become a Member
Michael Rintala, D.C.
Michael Rintala is a San Diego-based chiropractor
who specializes in rehabilitation and sports medicine.
He is one of only 18 international instructors for the Prague School of Rehabilitation, teaching dynamic neuromuscular stabilization (DNS).  He is also a certified
Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) and certified
in full body
Active Release Technique.  In addition, he serves
on the PGA Tour Sports Medicine Team and the USA Surfing High Performance Committee.
Instagram:
@rintala_movementflow
Facebook:
Michael Rintala DC
Youtube Channel:
Michael Rintala, DC
Websites:
rintalachiro.com
and
rintalamovementdesigns.com