Mike Israetel is a sports physiologist, competitive bodybuilder, and co-founder of Renaissance Periodization, where he coaches athletes and professionals in diet and weight training. In this episode, Mike shares his journey from powerlifting to academia, breaking down the core principles of resistance training, including exercise selection, volume, intensity, and frequency. He debunks common misconceptions about strength training, explains how to structure an effective program for beginners and advanced lifters, and provides candid insights into his experience with anabolic steroids, discussing their effects on muscle growth, performance, and health risks. This conversation offers a deep dive into the science of building muscle, the realities of bodybuilding at the highest levels, and the potential of AI-driven breakthroughs to advance human performance and longevity.
Subscribe on:
APPLE PODCASTS
|
SPOTIFY
|
RSS
|
OVERCAST
We discuss:
Mike’s academic journey, and early experiences in powerlifting, personal training, and sports physiology [3:30];
Mike’s transition from powerlifting to bodybuilding, and his scientific and artistic approach to sculpting muscle and optimizing aesthetics [9:15];
The value of strength training, time efficiency, and how it differs from endurance training [14:45];
Neurological fatigue in strength training: balancing recovery and pushing the limits [26:15];
The relationship between training intensity and volume, why muscle growth is not linear, and how different approaches affect results [35:00];
Sustainable and effective approaches to maximizing muscle growth: training close to failure while minimizing fatigue [40:00];
An efficient and effective resistance training program for beginners with limited time [49:00];
Advice for finding a good trainer [1:06:30];
Troubleshooting training plateaus: optimizing exercise selection, intensity, and recovery for muscle growth [1:13:30];
The impact of genetics, age, and lifestyle on muscle growth [1:27:45];
The importance of nutrition, protein intake, and consistency in both training and diet for muscle growth [1:31:00];
The use of anabolic steroids to boost muscle growth: doses, drug combinations, and side effects [1:35:45];
Long-term impact of steroid use on muscle retention, the role of genetics and individual variability, and their impact after discontinuation [1:52:15];
Trade-offs of long-term usage of supraphysiologic doses of testosterone: health, performance, and Mike’s future plans [2:00:45];
The potential for AI-driven medical breakthroughs to reverse aging and disease [2:07:30];
The role of AI in accelerating drug development, advancing human longevity, and overcoming biological limitations [2:19:45];
The philosophical implications of simulated reality, the impact of robotics on human labor and economics, and the challenge of predicting the future [2:25:15];
Would having kids change Mike’s philosophy around anabolic steroid use? [2:32:15];
The role of GLP-1 agonists in bodybuilding and general weight management, and the moral and philosophical debates surrounding their use [2:35:45]; and
More.
Show Notes
Mike’s academic journey, and early experiences in powerlifting, personal training, and sports physiology [3:30]
There’s going to be some folks listening and watching us who are probably very familiar with Mike’s work and they’ve probably come to learn about him as Peter has through endless years of being both amused and educated by his content on YouTube
But there’s probably a group of people here just in my audience that aren’t overlapping with yours
Give folks a chance to get to know you, and talk a little bit about your background
Mike came to the US from Russia when he was 7
Before that, he grew up in Moscow, Russia
In the US, he grew up in the metropolitan Detroit area in a place called Oak Park, Michigan
What did you study in undergrad?
Movement science, kinesiology at the University of Michigan
What sports were you playing then?
He wrestled in high school, but he wasn’t very good at it, wasn’t dedicated
He got into lifting hardcore towards the middle and end of high school
By the time he was in college, he was gearing up to start competing in powerlifting
He actually started the Michigan Powerlifting Club
A team that went to meets and all that stuff
He was a competitive powerlifter in his undergraduate years
Peter adds, “
For folks who might be confused about all the different disciplines,
powerlifting
is the sport where there are 3 and only 3 lifts. There’s a deadlift, a bench press, a squat, and you win by having the highest total weights across the three
.”
So squat plus bench plus deadlift equals total, and the person with the biggest total for the weight class
Or absolute or by formula wins the whole thing
Mike was not into bodybuilding yet
Did you go off and do your PhD right away after undergrad?
No, he got a master’s
In the exercise science field, going straight from undergraduate to a PhD is very rare
Usually you need a lot more preparatory work because the undergraduate curriculum typically just doesn’t teach you a whole lot of applied super specialized exercise science
He learned anatomy and physiology very well, but much more general curriculum
Especially at an RO1 school like Michigan,  they didn’t super hyper specialize
He learned almost nothing about sports whatsoever
Resistance training wasn’t a big focus there; he must have had 2 bullet points of how to resistance train in any one of his classes
It was chronic disease management, health, clinical application
Right after undergrad, he went to Appalachian State University to get a Master’s degree under
Dr. Travis Triplett
and
Dr. Jeff McBride
That was a subspecialty of exercise science: strength and conditioning
So much closer to what he was super passionate about
Mike then worked for 1 year as a personal trainer
It’s like jail
He did a year in Manhattan with his colleague
Mr. Nick Shaw
, who’s now the co-founder and CEO of their company,
RP
They trained folks at a private personal training studio in Manhattan (like CTOs of major companies)
Mike had never met a truly rich person until he met someone who was worth like $50 million
Turns out they’re just really nice cool people that are really chill and have the same problems everyone else does, trying to get in shape
In that year, Mike realized he didn’t know enough, and then he enrolled in the PhD program for sport physiology at East Tennessee State University under
Dr. Mike Stone
That was an amazing time
He probably learned more in that 3 years than he ever learned at school
Totally immersive
Got to work with teams, got to work with athletes, strength and conditioning coach
Truly sports science work
“
We integrate all of the variables, sport coaching, strength and conditioning, sports medicine, nutrition, the whole gamut. Incredible experience.
”‒ Mike Israetel
Mike got a PhD there and then taught at the University of Central Missouri for a while
Taught at Temple University in Philadelphia for a while
Then he went full depth into private industry founding RP
This happened during the time he was in the PhD program
Sometime during the years at Temple, it became apparent that he was more productive not teaching because there was so much to do with the company
So he took some time away from teaching
Then he came back to teach under his friend
Dr. Brad Schoenfeld
Who’s the world expert scientifically in muscle hypertrophy
Mike taught at his master’s program for a while
He left that recently to do private industry full time
When did you start putting out these videos on
YouTube
?
Peter only discovered them a couple years ago, but thinks he’s been doing this much longer
Mike started posting videos on YouTube in 2020 during peak COVID
He records most of his YouTube videos at his home studio
If he drops the “C word”, the video guy’s like, “
Different take
.”
They one-take almost everything and that they will roll back
The algorithm will flag it and put a COVID warning
Mike’s transition from powerlifting to bodybuilding, and his scientific and artistic approach to sculpting muscle and optimizing aesthetics [9:15]
Going back to your personal evolution as you’re going through this journey of master’s, PhD, industry, are you still focusing on powerlifting personally?
Mike was focused on powerlifting up until he got into the Master’s program
Towards the end of undergrad he picked up a muscle magazine at the grocery store
Flex Magazine
had an issue that summarized the prior
2002 Mr. Olympia contest
with all the pictures of the bodybuilders
Ronnie
won again; that was his 4th or 5th time winning Mr. Olympia and he didn’t look his best
Everyone suspected
Jay Cutler
could have beat him if he showed up that year (He almost beat him in 2001)
Figure 1.
Jay Cutler and Ronnie Coleman. Image credit:
M&F
Mike remembers reading the magazine and looking at the pictures ‒ it was enlightening because Mike realized he had an eye for aesthetics
Some people will see muscular physiques and they kind of all look the same, like giant veiny, overcooked hot dogs (which is not wrong)
Mike looked at the physiques and he was really taken aback, especially by some of them
[It was a feeling akin to what] normal people get when they look at very good art: that whoa, I’m looking at something very special, something that’s emotive
That’s when Mike started to pursue his own hypertrophy training (muscle growth training)
What were you looking like at the time?
{end of show notes preview}
Would you like access to extensive show notes and references for this podcast (and more)?
Check out this post
to see an example of what the substantial show notes look like. Become a member today to get access.
Become a Member
Mike Israetel, Ph.D.
Mike Israetel​ earned his PhD in Sport Physiology from East Tennessee State University. Dr. Mike is a seasoned expert in the field of fitness and performance. Formerly a professor at Lehman College, Temple University, and the University of Central Missouri, he taught a variety of exercise science courses focusing on nutrition, strength, and hypertrophy. ​
Dr. Israetel has also worked as a sports nutrition consultant for the U.S. Olympic Training Site in Johnson City, Tennessee. He has personally coached countless athletes in nutrition and weight training, and continues to push his own limits as a competitive bodybuilder and professional Brazilian Jiu Jitsu grappler.
Dr. Israetel coauthored many ebooks including
The Renaissance Diet 2.0
,
Scientific Principles of Hypertrophy Training
,
Understanding Healthy Eating
,
Scientific Principles of Strength Training,
Recovering from Training
,
The Minicut Manual
, and
How Much Should I Train
. He cofounded
Renaissance Periodization
and is currently their head science consultant. [
RP
]
Instagram:
drmikeisraetel
Mike’s YouTube Channel:
@MikeIsraetelMakingProgress
RP YouTube Channel:
@RenaissancePeriodization
Website:
RP